Docs/add tutorial (#348)
glotzerlab/freud: doc/source/tutorial/neighborfinding.rst

=================
Finding Neighbors
=================

Now that you've been introduced to the basics of interacting with **freud**, let's dive into the central feature of **freud**: efficiently and flexibly finding neighbors in periodic systems.

Problem Statement
=================

Neighbor-Based Calculations
---------------------------
As discussed in :ref:`the previous section <computeclass>`, a central task in many of the computations in **freud** is finding particles' neighbors.
These calculations typically only involve a limited subset of a particle's neighbors that are defined as characterizing its local environment.
This requirement is analogous to the force calculations typically performed in molecular dynamics simulations, where a cutoff radius is specified beyond which pair forces are assumed to be small enough to neglect.
Unlike in simulation, though, many analyses call for different specifications than simply selecting all points within a certain distance.

An important example is the calculation of order parameters, which can help characterize phase transitions.
Such parameters can be highly sensitive to the precise way in which neighbors are selected.

> For instance, if a hard distance cutoff is imposed in finding neighbors for the hexatic order parameter, a particle may only be found to have five neighbors when it actually has six neighbors except the first is just outside the cutoff radius.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For instance, if a hard distance cutoff is imposed in finding neighbors for the hexatic order parameter, a particle may only be found to have five neighbors when it actually has six neighbors except the last particle is slightly outside the cutoff radius.
```

However, these two sets of points would be equivalent in a periodic system.

We then generate an additional set of ``query_points`` and ask for neighbors using the :meth:`query <freud.locality.AABBQuery>` method.
This function accepts two arguments: a set of points, and a :class:`dict` of **query arguments**.
Query arguments are a central concept in **freud** and represent a complete specification of the set of neighbors to be found.
In general, the most common forms of queries are those requesting either a fixed number of neighbors, as in the example above, or those requesting all neighbors within a specific distance.
For example, if we wanted to rerun the above example but instead find all bonds of length less than or equal to 2, we would simply replace the for loop above with:

.. code-block:: python

    for bond in aq.query(query_points, dict(r_max=2)):
        distances.append(bond[2])

Query arguments constitute a powerful method for specifying a query request.
Many query arguments may be combined for more specific purposes.

> A common use-case is finding all neighbors within a single set of points (i.e. setting ``query_points=points`` in the above example).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A common use-case is finding all neighbors within a single set of points (i.e. setting ``query_points = points`` in the above example).
```

.. _neighbors:

=================

> Neighbor Finding

Reviewer: Misaligned heading (extra equals sign).

=================

Problem Statement
=================

> A central task in many of the computations in **freud** is finding nearest neighbors.

Reviewer: `finding particles' neighbors.` (so as not to confuse this statement with _k_-nearest neighbors queries)

Neighbor Querying
=================

To support efficiently finding neighbors in periodic systems, the **freud** library provides a unified interface to finding neighbors that can both be accessed directly by users and is leveraged internally by all methods that require such calculations.
The central interface for neighbor finding is the :py:class:`freud.locality.NeighborQuery` family of classes, which provide methods for dynamically finding neighbors given a :py:class:`freud.box.Box`.
The :py:class:`freud.locality.NeighborQuery` class defines an abstract interface for neighbor finding that is implemented by its subclasses, namely the :py:class:`freud.locality.LinkCell` and :py:class:`freud.locality.AABBQuery` classes.
These classes represent data structures used to accelerate neighbor finding.

In general, these data structures operate by constructing them using one set of points, after which they can be queried to efficiently find the neighbors of arbitrary other points.

> The queries can either be based stricly on a distance cutoff (using :py:class:`freud.locality.NeighborQuery.queryBall`), or by searching for a specific number of neighbors (using :py:class:`freud.locality.NeighborQuery.query`).

Reviewer: strictly

Reviewer: Try `:py:meth:` for the query methods?

These classes expose a standardized API for this task, returning a generator than can be easily looped over.
Alternatively, the pairs of points can be converted into a :py:class:`freud.locality.NeighborList`, a lightweight class that can be used to store pairs of bonds that will be used multiple times.
For example, the following code first uses the :py:class:`freud.locality.LinkCell` to search for at least 6 neighbors for all points in a given set and calculate the average distances between them, and then uses a :py:class:`freud.locality.AABBQuery` to create a :py:class:`freud.locality.NeighborList` based on a distance cutoff:

.. code-block:: python

    import numpy as np
    import freud

    # As an example, we randomly generate 100 points in a 10x10x10 cubic box.
    L = 10
    num_points = 100

    # Note that we are shifting all points into the expected range for freud.
    # An alternative would be to simply wrap all points back into the box using
    # the box.wrap method.
    points = np.random.rand(num_points)*L - L/2
    box = freud.box.Box.cube(L)

>     # Linked cell list are parameterized by the size of the individual cells.

Reviewer: cell lists

>     # Intelligent choices of the cell width are crucial for good performance.

Reviewer: It would be kinder to say "The choice of cell width has a significant impact on performance." or "For optimal performance, the cell width must be chosen carefully."

    cell_width = 2
    lc = freud.locality.LinkCell(box=box, points=points, cell_width=cell_width)
    distances = []
    for bond in lc.query(query_points=points, num_neighbors=4):
        # The returned bonds are tuples of the form
        # (index_query_point, index_point, distance).
        distances.append(bond[2])
    avg_distance = np.mean(distances)

    # The result of a query object can be transparently converted into a
    # NeighborList object for future use in computations. In this example,
    # we instead perform a distance-based query using the queryBall method.
    query_distance = 3
    freud.locality.AABBQuery(box=box, points=points).queryBall(
        query_points=points, r=query_distance).toNeighborList()

Neighbor Computations
=====================

Classes that actually involve finding neighbors in general expose an API that maps directly onto the neighbor querying API.
Like all compute classes, they expose a ``compute`` method, but in general these methods have a signature ``compute(nq, query_points=None, query_args={}, nlist=None, ...)`` (potentially with additional arguments as signified by the ellipsis).

> The ``nq`` argument can be either a :py:class:`freud.locality.NeighborQuery` or a tuple ``(box, points)``, where ``box`` and ``points`` have the usual meanings as elsewhere in **freud**.

Reviewer: Let's link those terms to concrete definitions specified elsewhere in the docs.

    box = freud.box.Box.cube(L)

    # First, let's compute an RDF using the straightforward API.
    rdf = freud.density.RDF(rmax=5, dr=0.1).compute(
        (box, points))

    # Now, let's instead reuse the object for a pair of calculations:
    nq = freud.locality.AABBQuery(box=box, points=points)
    rdf = freud.density.RDF(rmax=5, dr=0.1).compute(nq)

    nbins = 100
    rmax = 4
    orientations = np.array([[1, 0, 0, 0]*num_points)
    pmft = freud.pmft.PMFTXYZ(rmax, rmax, rmax, nbins, nbins, nbins)
    pmft.compute(nq, orientations=orientations)

If the user in fact expects to perform computations with the exact same pairs of neighbors (for example, to compute :py:class:`freud.order.Steinhardt` for multiple :math:`l` values), then the user can further speed up the calculation by precomputing the entire :py:class:`freud.locality.NeighborList` and storing it for future use.
In this case, if the user passes in ``compute(nq=(box, points))``, **freud** will not spend the time to construct a :py:class:`freud.locality.NeighborQuery`, knowing that no querying is necessary because a :py:class:`freud.locality.NeighborList` has been provided.

> This mode of operation is particularly useful when the user wishes to use a :py:class:`freud.locality.NeighborList` computed using an alternate method, such as a Voronoi cell calculation.

Reviewer: "using a method not supported by NeighborQuery"?

Reviewer: I changed my mind about this. Resolving.

.. code-block:: python

    # Reusing the AABBQuery object constructed in the previous example, 
    # we first attempt the computation for various values of l using a
    # distance based cutoff for neighbor finding.
    rmax = 3
    nlist_ball = nq.queryBall(points, r=rmax)
    q6_ball_arrays = []
    for l in range(3, 6):
        ql = freud.density.Steinhardt(l=l)
        q6_ball_arrays.append(ql.compute((box, points), nlist_ball).order)

    nlist_number = nq.queryBall(points, num_neighbors=6)
    for l in range(3, 6):
        q6 = freud.density.Steinhardt(l=l)

>         q6_number_arrays.append(ql.compute((box, points), nlist_order).order)

Reviewer: nlist_order ➡️  nlist_number

Reviewer: Declare `q6_number_arrays`

Reviewer: Use a more common choice of `l` values, e.g. `for l in [4, 6, 8]`

To understand what this means, consider the following simple example:

.. code-block:: python

    positions_A = [[0, 0, 0]]
    positions_B = [[-1, 0, 0], [1, 0, 0]]
    nq_A = freud.locality.AABBQuery(box=box, points=positions_A)
    count_A = 0
    for _ in nq_A.query(positions_B, num_neighbors=1):
        count_A += 1

    nq_B = freud.locality.AABBQuery(box=box, points=positions_B)
    count_B = 0
    for _ in nq_B.query(positions_A, num_neighbors=1):
        count_B += 1

    print(count_A)
    >>> 2

    print(count_B)
    >>> 1

The reason these calculations give different results is simple.
We only asked for one neighbor for each point, but in the first case we queried for two points, and as a result, it found us one neighbor for each of the two points.
In the second case, we constructed our object with two points, but then only requested the neighbors for the single point in ``positions_A``; as a result, we only found one neighbor.
This logic is precisely what governs the ``query_points`` argument; the ``points`` are used to build the query object, and the ``query_points`` are what is passed to the ``query*`` methods.

> We are now in a position to explain the ``exclude_ii`` query argument.

Reviewer: Perhaps add a heading like "self-exclusion."

When performing a calculation on a single-component system, we typically do not wish to include a particle as its own neighbor.

> The ``exclude_ii`` argument indicates to a ``query*`` method that any pair of particles with identical indices in the ``points`` and ``query_points`` arrays should be ignored.

Reviewer: I think the glob syntax is potentially confusing, perhaps use plain English instead of code here.

Since this behavior is generally expected for single-component systems, it is automatically set to ``True`` in compute classes if ``query_points`` are not passed in explicitly (in which case the ``points`` are reused as the ``query_points``).
Conversely, the argument defaults to ``False`` when ``query_points`` are explicitly provided.

> In both cases, the user can reverse the behavior by passing the argument explicitly to the ``query_args``.

Reviewer: the user can override the default behavior
